>> Woodruff: THE FIGHT FOR IRAQ.
GOVERNMENT FORCES AND MILITIAS
STRIVE TO BEAT BACK ISLAMIC
STATE FIGHTERS
GOOD EVENING ON THIS MEMORIAL
DAY.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
GWENFILL I IS AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD:
WHAT'S NEXT FOR RULES GOVERNING
U.S. SURVEILLANCE AFTER THE
SENATE FAILS TO EXTEND KEY
PROVISIONS.
PLUS, THE WEEK AHEAD IN POLITICS
WITH AMY WALTER AND TAMARA
KEITH.
AND...
(HORN PLAYING "TAPS")
>> Woodruff: WE MARK THIS
HOLIDAY WITH SEVERAL
PERSPECTIVES ON THOSE WHO GAVE
THE ULTIMATE SACRIFICE, AND THE
IMPACT ON LOVED ONES LEFT ON THE
HOMEFRONT.
>> THOSE THAT REALLY HAVE IN
SOME WAYS SUFFERED THE MOST ARE
THOSE THAT ARE THE FAMILIES, AND
THAT'S THE KIDS, THE WIVES, THE
HUSBANDS, THE PARENTS.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN 14 YEARS, NO AMERICAN TROOPS
WERE INVOLVED IN MAJOR GROUND
COMBAT ON A MEMORIAL DAY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA TOOK NOTE OF
THAT IN HIS APPEARANCE AT
ARLINGTON NATIONAL CEMETERY.
HE LAID A WREATH AT THE TOMB OF
THE UNKNOWNS, AND SAID THE SITE
IS "MORE THAN A FINAL RESTING
PLACE FOR FALLEN HEROES."
>> EACH SIMPLE STONE MARKER,
ARRANGED IN PERFECT MILITARY
PRECISION, SIGNIFIES THE COST OF
OUR BLESSINGS.
IT IS A DEBT WE CAN NEVER FULLY
REPAY, BUT IT IS A DEBT WE WILL
NEVER STOP TRYING TO FULLY
REPAY.
BY REMAINING A NATION WORTHY OF
THEIR SACRIFICE.
>> Woodruff: ANOTHER WREATH-
LAYING, IN KABUL, PAID TRIBUTE
TO MORE THAN 2,200 AMERICANS
KILLED IN THE AFGHAN WAR.
SOME 10,000 ARE STILL STATIONED
THERE AS ADVISORS AND TRAINERS.
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN SOUGHT TO
REASSURE IRAQ'S PRIME MINISTER
TODAY AFTER A DUST-UP OVER
FIGHTING THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP.
IN A STATEMENT, WHITE HOUSE
OFFICIALS SAID THE VICE
PRESIDENT'S PHONE CALL,
"RECOGNIZED THE ENORMOUS
SACRIFICE AND BRAVERY OF IRAQI
FORCES."
THAT CAME AFTER DEFENSE
SECRETARY ASH CARTER HAD BLAMED
THE LOSS OF RAMADI ON IRAQI
TROOPS WHO RAN AWAY.
THEMSELVES.Woodruff: IRAQI LEADS
CONDEMNED CARTER'S STATEMENT,
AND A TOP COMMANDER IN IRAN
CHARGED TODAY THAT, IN FACT, THE
U.S. LACKS THE WILL TO FIGHT
ISIS.
THERE'S WORD THAT CLEVELAND HAS
REACHED A SETTLEMENT WITH THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT OVER ALLEGED
POLICE ABUSES.
"THE NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTS IT
INVOLVES A PATTERN OF EXCESSIVE
USE OF FORCE AND
UNCONSTITUTIONAL ACTIONS.
ON SATURDAY, A JUDGE ACQUITTED A
WHITE CLEVELAND OFFICER IN A
SHOOTING BARRAGE THAT KILLED TWO
UNARMED BLACK SUSPECTS.
THE GOVERNOR OF TEXAS DECLARED
DISASTERS IN TWO DOZEN COUNTIES
TODAY, AFTER A WEEKEND OF
CATASTROPHIC FLOODING AND
TORNADOES.
AND, THE SEVERE WEATHER
CONTINUED EARLY TODAY, AS A
STORM BLASTED A MEXICAN TOWN
JUST ACROSS THE TEXAS BORDER.
THE PEOPLE OF CIUDAD ACUNA AWOKE
TO THE RAVAGES OF A TORNADO THAT
TORE THROUGH JUST AFTER
DAYBREAK.
AUTHORITIES REPORTED MORE THAN A
DOZEN PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
FARTHER NORTH, LIGHTNING LIT UP
THE KANSAS SKY OVERNIGHT, AND
OUTLINED A TWISTER MOVING ACROSS
THE OPEN PLAIN.
TOGETHER, THEY WERE THE LATEST
OUTBREAKS FROM A MASSIVE WEATHER
SYSTEM THAT STRETCHED ALL THE
WAY FROM THE GULF OF MEXICO TO
THE GREAT LAKES.
IN ITS WAKE, CAME NOT ONLY
TORNADOES, BUT SEVERE FLOODING.
>> OH MY GOD.
>> Woodruff: CENTRAL TEXAS BORE
THE BRUNT, WITH CREEKS AND
RIVERS RAPIDLY SWELLING,
SWEEPING CARS AWAY.
AT LEAST A DOZEN PEOPLE WERE
MISSING AFTER FLASH FLOODING
SENT THE BLANCO RIVER RISING 26
FEET IN AN HOUR.
>> WE DO HAVE 12 MISSING PERSONS
WE ARE ACTIVELY SEARCHING FOR.
WE HAVE ADDITIONAL CONCERNS
WHERE WE ARE GATHERING
INFORMATION FROM REPORTING
PARTIES TO MAKE SURE THAT
RESIDENTS, ARE MISSING OR ARE
NOT MISSING.
>> Woodruff: ACROSS TEXAS,
HUNDREDS OF HOMES WERE
OPLE WERE FORCED TO MOVE TO
HIGHER GROUND.
>> THEY'VE LOST EVERYTHING.
THEIR CARS, THEIR FURNITURE,
EVERYTHING.
AND, IT'S JUST AMAZING.
I CAN'T EVEN BEGIN TO LET IT ALL
SINK IN.
I DON'T THINK I WANT TO KNOW
JUST YET.
>> Woodruff: SEVERE FLOODING
ALSO HIT THE DALLAS AREA, AND
THE GOVERNOR WARNED TEXAS IS NOT
OUT OF THE WOODS YET.
>> POWERFUL MESSAGE TO ANYONE IN
HARMS WAY OVER ENTIRE STATE OF
TEXAS AS WE SEE ONGOING RAIN AND
THAT IS THE RELENTLESS TSUNAMI
TYPE POWER THAT THIS WAVE OF
WATER CAN POSE FOR PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: AND THE RAIN DID
KEEP FALLING, IN HOUSTON AND
ELSEWHERE, FURTHER DAMAGING
APARTMENTS AND HOMES THAT HAD
BEEN TORN OPEN BY A TORNADO ON
SUNDAY.
THE STORMS ARE BLAMED FOR AT
LEAST THREE DEATHS IN OKLAHOMA
AND TEXAS.
IN INDIA, THERE WAS NO BREAK IN
EXTREME HEAT THAT'S KILLED MORE
THAN 500 PEOPLE IN RECENT WEEKS.
TEMPERATURES IN ONE NORTHERN
STATE REACHED 116 DEGREES ON
SUNDAY.
PEOPLE SUFFERING FROM
DEHYDRATION INUNDATED HOSPITALS
THAT WERE BALINGTT POWER
OUTAGES.
AND, STREETS IN SEVERAL MAJOR
CITIES WERE ABANDONED AS PEOPLE
SOUGHT OUT SHADE.
NATIONAL POLICE IN MALAYSIA
REPORT THEY'VE FOUND 139 MASS
GRAVES, AND SIGNS OF TORTURE, IN
MORE THAN TWO DOZEN CAMPS WHERE
TRAFFICKERS ONCE HELD MIGRANTS.
INVESTIGATORS CARRIED AWAY BODY
PARTS TODAY FROM ONE SITE AT THE
BORDER WITH THAILAND.
IT'S BELIEVED ROHINGYA MUSLIMS
WHO'D FLED MYANMAR WERE KEPT
THERE.
CHINA SHARPLY CRITICIZED THE
U.S. TODAY IN A DIPLOMATIC ROW
OVER THE DISPUTED SOUTH CHINA
SEA.
BEIJING COMPLAINED AFTER A U.S.
RECONNAISSANCE PLANE FLEW OVER
THE SPRATLY ISLANDS, WHERE THE
CHINESE ARE BUILDING BASES,
DESPITE INTERNATIONAL PROTESTS
>> (translated): THE
U.S.
U.S. MILITARY AIRCRAFT'S SPYING
ON
MILITARY AIRCRAFT'S SPYING ON
CHINA'S ISLANDS COULD EASILY
CAUSE MISCALCULATION, AND WAS
VERY DANGEROUS AND
IRRESPONSIBLE.
I WANT TO EMPHASIZE THAT CHINA'S
DETERMINATION TO PROTECT ITS
NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY AND
TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY IS AS FIRM
AS A ROCK.
>> Woodruff: A TABLOID OWNED BY
THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY'S
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER WENT EVEN
FURTHER.
IT SAID WAR WITH THE U.S. IS
"INEVITABLE," UNLESS WASHINGTON
BACKS OFF.
FORMER ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER
EHUD OLMERT WAS SENTENCED TODAY
TO MORE JAIL TIME.
HE GOT EIGHT MONTHS IN PRISON
FOR TAKING ILLEGAL PAYMENTS FROM
A U.S. BUSINESSMAN.
IT HAPPENED WHEN HE WAS MAYOR OF
JERUSALEM.
OLMERT HAD ALREADY RECEIVED A
SEPARATE SIX-YEAR SENTENCE FOR
TAKING BRIBES.
BACK IN THIS COUNTRY,
ANONYMOUS THREATS TARGETED
AIRLINERS BOUND FOR NEW YORK.
U.S. FIGHTER JETS ESCORTED ONE
AIR-FRANCE FLIGHT TO KENNEDY
AIRPORT, AFTER CLAIMS OF A
CHEMICAL WEAPON ON BOARD.
THAT PLANE WAS EVENTUALLY
SEARCHED AND CLEARED.
THEN, AUTHORITIES SEARCHED A
FLIGHT FROM SAUDI ARABIAN
AIRLINES BECAUSE OF ANOTHER
CALL.
AN AMERICAN AIRLINES FLIGHT FROM
ENGLAND WAS ALSO THREATENED.
AND, COMEDIAN ANNE MEARA DIED
OVER THE WEEKEND, AFTER A LONG
CAREER IN TV, MOVIES AND THE
STAGE.
MEARA AND HUSBAND JERRY STILLER
WERE A HIT COMEDY DUO IN THE
1960'S BEFORE SHE WENT ON TO A
SERIES OF ACTING ROLES.
IN 2006, SHE JOINED SON BEN
STILLER IN THE MOVIE "NIGHT AT
THE MUSEUM."
ANNE MEARA WAS 85 YEARS OLD.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
THE FIGHT TO BEAT BACK ISLAMIC
STATE FORCES IN IRAQ.
WHAT'S NEXT FOR RULES GOVERNING
U.S. SURVEILLANCE.
THE WEEK AHEAD IN POLITICS WITH
AMY WALTER AND TAMARA KEITH.
WHY START-UP TECH ENTREPRENEURS
ARE MOVING BUSINESS TO PAKISTAN.
PLUS, THREE STORIES FOR THIS
MEMORIAL DAY, ON THE LONGEST WAR
IN U.S. HISTORY, THE STRUGGLES
AT HOME FOR LOVED ONES OF
SOLDIERS REDEPLOYED, AND,
MEMORIZING THE NAMES OF THE
FALLEN IN AFGHANISTAN.
>> Woodruff: WE TURN NOW TO THE
FIGHT FOR IRAQ, AND THE GROWING
TENSIONS THE RISE OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE HAS ROILED UP.
JOINING ME IS DOUGLAS OLLIVANT.
A FORMER MILITARY PLANNER IN
IRAQ WHO SERVED ON THE NATIONAL
SECURITY COUNCIL UNDER PRESIDENT
OBAMA AND PRESIDENT GEORGE W.
BUSH.
HE'S NOW A SENIOR NATIONAL
SECURITY FELLOW AT THE NEW
AMERICA FOUNDATION AND PARTNER
AT MANTID INTERNATIONAL.
DOUG OLLIVANT, WELCOME BACK TO
THE "NewsHour".
WE HAVE THE COMMENTS FROM THE
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE OVER THE
WEEKEND SAYING IRAQI TROOPS RAN
AWAY, THAT THEY DIDN'T HAVE THE
WILL TO FIGHT.
BUT THEN TODAY YOU HAVE THE
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN CALLING THE
IRAQI PRIME MINISTER TO SAY, NO,
IRAQI TROOPS ARE DOING A GREAT
JOB.
WHICH IS IT?
>> JUST A FEW WEEKS AGO WE HAD
SECRETARY KERRY SAYING THAT HE
WAS SURE THAT RAMADI WAS GOING
TO BE RECLAIMED.
SO CLEARLY WE HAVE SECRETARY
CARTER AS AN OUTLIER IN THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT POSITION WHICH
SOMETIMES JUST MEANS YOU'RE
SAYING INCONVENIENT THINGS
PEOPLE CONTINUE WANT TO HEAR.
CLEARLY PROBLEMS WITH THE IRAQI
EARNINGS THEY NEED TO BE
ADDRESSED, BUT THE COUNTERPOINT
IS ALSO TRUE, THE IRAQI ARMY WAS
IN RAMADI FOR A YEAR AND A HALF
AND DID FIGHT OFF THE ISLAMIC
STATE THERE FOR A YEAR AND A
HALF, AND IF WE'RE TO BELIEVE
THE ACCOUNTS, REALLY WE'RE AT
THE RECEIVING END OF A
WELL-PLANNED, WELL-EXECUTED
ATTACK BY THE ISLAMIC STATE THAT
INVOLVED A NUMBER OF VERY, VERY
LARGE EXPLOSIVE CAR BOMBS, SOME
OF WHICH WERE SAID TO BE THE
SIDES OF THOSE IN THE OKLAHOMA
CITY BOMBING, LEVELING BLOCKS OR
AT LEAST LARGE BUILDINGS, AN
ASSAULT ANY MILITARY FORCE WOULD
HAVE A HARD TIME WITH.
SO THERE IS SOME TRUTH TO WHAT
THE SECRETARY IS SAYING BUT, AT
THE SAME TIME, THE INDIGNATION
ON THE PART OF THE IRAQIS IS
VERY VALID.
SOME OF THESE SOLDIERS HAVE
FOUGHT VERY WELL.
>> Woodruff: IN TERMS OF
WHETHER THEY WERE WELL SUPPLIED,
WHETHER THEY HAD THE TRAINING
THEY NEEDED, WHERE IS THE ANSWER
TO THAT?
BECAUSE WE'VE LOOKED AT THE U.S.
HAS BEEN PROVIDING SUPPORT AND
YET THESE TROOPS STILL ARE NOT
ABLE TO DO THE JOB.
>> THAT'S UNDENIABLY TRUE.
THERE HAS BEEN A LOT OF SUPPORT
GIVEN.
THESE TROOPS IN MOHAMMEDY HAD
NOT BEEN TRAINED BY THE UNITED
STATES, BUT YOU WOULD HOPE THE
IRAQIS WOULD BE ABLE TO GENERATE
THEIR OWN TRAINING DEVICES AT
SOME POINT.
BUT THERE ARE CLEARLY PROBLEMS
WITH LEADERSHIP.
WE HEARD RUMORS THE SOLDIERS HAD
NOT BEEN PAID.
VERY SYSTEMATIC PROBLEMS WITH
THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT STILL.
IT'S A RELATIVELY NEW
GOVERNMENT, ONLY BEEN AROUND FOR
A DECADE OR SO, ONLY TRULY
SOVEREIGN FOR THE LAST THREE
YEARS SINCE WE DEPARTED AND
THEY'RE STILL LEARNING HOW TO DO
THIS.
>> Woodruff: WE KNOW THERE IS
CRITICISM COMING UP FROM ALL
QUARTERS IN TERMS OF WHETHER THE
ADMINISTRATION APPROACH IS THE
CORRECT ONE AND WHETHER THE
TRAITION OUGHT TO BE -- THE
ADMINISTRATION OUGHT TO BE DOING
MORE OR SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
HOW DO YOU READ ALL THIS?
>> CERTAINLY, THERE'S A LOT OF
CRITICISM.
ANYTIME YOU HAVE SETBACKS,
CRITICISM IS INEVITABLE.
IT IS CLEAR THE ISLAMIC STATE
HAD A GOOD WEEKEND LAST WEEKEND
IN THE RETAKING OF RAMADI AND,
OF COURSE, THAT DOES CALL FOR
YOU TO REFLECT.
BUT I THINK IN GENERAL THE
ADMINISTRATION IS ON THE RIGHT
PATH.
WE NEED TO BE TRAINING, WE NEED
TO BE ARMING, WE NEED TO BE
SUPPORTING.
WE MAY NEED TO DO A LITTLE MORE
OF ALL OF THAT, BUT IN GENERAL
WE NEED TO CONTINUE TO WORK
THROUGH THE IRAQIS TO GET THE
ISLAMIC STATE OUT OF IRAQ,
HAVING US DO IT MIGHT BE MORE
EFFICIENT BUT THERE ARE SO MANY
NEGATIVE SECOND ORDER EFFECTS OF
THAT, THAT IT'S JUST
UNDESIRABLE.
>> Woodruff: SO, DOUGLAS
OLLIVANT, IS IT JUST A MATTER OF
BEING PATIENT?
>> I THINK IN SOME WAYS THAT'S
EXACTLY IT.
IT'S GOING TO TAKE TIME TO GET
THE ISLAMIC STATE PUSHBACK OUT
OF IRAQ.
PRIME MINISTER ABADI SAID HE'S
GOING.
TAKE RAMADI BACK IN DAYS, I
THINK THAT'S AN EXAGGERATION,
BUT IT WOULDN'T SURPRISE ME IF
THEY TOOK IT BACK IN FOUR TO
EIGHT WEEKS, THE TIME THEY USED
IN THE TIKRIT ATTACK.
WE'VE HAD A SERIES OF SUCCESSES
IN TIKRIT AND OTHER AREAS.
YOU'VE HAD THE VARIOUS IRAQI
SECURITY FORCES AND/OR MILITIAS
PUSHING BACK THE ISLAMIC STATE
OUT OF THE KEY BOURBON AREAS.
>> Woodruff: I THINK IT'S HARD
FOR PEOPLE TO KEEP TRACK OF
WHERE SHINGS STAND WITH REGARD
TO THE SUNNI-SHIA SPLIT THAT
EXISTS IN IRAQ, PUT DO YOU HAVE
THE SENSE THAT PRIME MINISTER
ABADI IS DOING THE BEST HE CAN
TO GET THE SUNNIS ENGAGED WITH
THIS FIGHT, OR IS THERE STILL
THIS SORT OF UNBRIDGEABLE DIVIDE
BETWEEN THE TWO?
>> WELL, I THINK PRIME MINISTER
ABADI IS VERY MUCH REACHING OUT
TO THE SUNNI, TRYING TO REACH
ACROSS THE AISLE, TRYING TO MAKE
THE DEAL, SO MUCH SO THAT HE'S
OFTEN ACCUSED BY HIS SHIA ARAB
BASE OF ABAN ABANDONING THEM AND
THEIR CONCERNS AND BEING MORE
CONCERNED ABOUT THE 20% MINORITY
OF ARAB SUNNI THAN THE 60 OR 65%
THAT ARE ARAB SHE. I CAN'T BUT
HE IS REACHING ACROSS.
THE QUESTION IS DOES HE HAVE THE
POLITICAL CAPITAL TO CONTINUE
DOING THAT AND CAN HE HOLD HIS
OWN BASE WHILE REACHING ACROSS
THE AISLE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT'S THE
THINKING IN TERMS OF WHAT MORE
THE U.S. COULD DO TO HELP THESE
IRAQI TROOPS?
>> I THINK CONTINUING TO PROVIDE
WEAPONS, CONTINUING TO GET MORE
MISSILES.
THE IRAQI FORCES IN RAMADI
DIDN'T HAVE THE ANTI-TANK
MISSILES THEY NEEDED TO STOP THE
VEHICLES, THE EXPLOSIVE CAR
BOMBS FROM ATTACKING THEIR
POSITIONS.
IT WOULDN'T HURT TO HAVE MORE
UNARMED SURVEILLANCE DRONES.
IF WE WERE TO PUSH THOSE, THEN
THE IRANIANS WOULDN'T HAVE TO
PROVIDE THEM, THAT'S A WAY FOR
US TO USE A CHESS MOVE AGAINST
THE IRANIAN INFLUENCE IN IRAQ
WHICH WE NEED TO BE CONCERNED
ABOUT.
SO THERE ARE APP SERIES OF
THINGS WE CAN DO, BUT
ESSENTIALLY IT'S MORE OF WHAT
WE'RE DOING -- EQUIPPING,
TRAINING AND INTELLIGENCE
SUPPORT.
>> Woodruff: DOUGLAS OLLIVANT,
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: NOW, WE LOOK AT
WHAT'S NEXT FOR THE RULES
GOVERNING U.S. SURVEILLANCE.
OVER THE WEEKEND, THE SENATE
FAILED TO EXTEND THREE KEY
PROVISIONS OF THE PATRIOT ACT
SET TO EXPIRE IN A WEEK.
THEY LEFT TOWN FOR A RECESS,
LEAVING LITTLE TIME LEFT TO COME
TO CONSENSUS.
TO HELP US UNDERSTAND WHAT LIES
AHEAD, NEWSHOUR POLITICAL
DIRECTOR LISA DESJARDINS.
SO, LISA, WHAT HAPPENED?
THERE INTO THE WEE HOURS
SATURDAY MORNING, AND THIS IS
THE PATRIOT ACT HANGING BY A
THREAD?
>> THIS IS A TEST FOR NEW
MAJORITY LEADER MITCH
McCONNELL, HE TOOK A STRATEGIC
RISK SOMETHING THAT WORKED IN
THE PAST BOTH SIDES AND SET A
HIGH
WAS GOING OUT OF TOWN.
IT DIPPED NOT WORK THIS TIME,
BLOCKED BY RAND PAUL SAND SOME
DEMOCRATS, PARTICULARLY ONE FROM
OREGON AND OTHER CONSERVATIVES
AS WELL.
IT CAME TO THE MIDNIGHT VOTE AND
THEY COULD NOT GET 60 VOTES FOR
ANY ONE KIND OF AGREEMENT.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT ON
THE MAJOR VOTES THAT HAPPENED IN
THE MIDNIGHT SESSION, ONE VOTE
TURNED OUT BETTER THAN THE
OTHER, THE VOTE FOR THE REVISED
VERSION OF THE SURVEILLANCE
POWERS, ONE THAT WOULD LIMIT
WHAT THE N.S.A. COULD DO, THE
FREEDOM ACT.
THAT WAS A FEW VOTES SHORT VERAS
SHORT.
THE DIVISION IN THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY ON THESE VOTES WAS ON
GEOGRAPHIC LINES.
WE LOOKED AT SOUTHERN SENATORS,
MIDWESTERN SENATORS WANTED A
STRAIGHT EXTENSION.
YOU LOOKED AT SENATORS IN THE
SOUTHWEST, THEY WERE WILLING TO
REVISE.
>> Woodruff: CLEARLY, MITCH
McCONNELL DIDN'T WANT THIS TO
HAPPEN.
WHAT WENT WRONG?
>> I THINK IT WAS REALLY JUST A
SHOWDOWN OVER HOW THE SENATE
WORKS.
RAND PAUL WAS ABLE TO USE THE
POWER OF A SINGLE SENATOR AND A
FEW OTHER SENATORS.
THE TRUTH IS A SINGLE SENATOR
CAN HOLD UP THE SENATE FOR THREE
OR FOUR DAYS.
MITCH McCONNELL COULD HAVE
KEPT THE SENATE GOING FOR THREE
OR FOUR DAYS AND RUN THE CLOCK
BUT HE DIDN'T.
>> Woodruff: QUICKLY, THEY
WILL COME BACK SUNDAY AND HAVE A
SUNDAY SESSION AT THE END OF THE
MEMORIAL WEEK BREAK.
WHAT NEEDS TO HAPPEN THEN AND,
MEANTIME, THE GOVERNMENT HAS TO
START PLANNING TO CUT BACK ON
SURVEILLANCE.
>> FIRST OF ALL, SENATORS NEED
TO BUY THEIR PLANE TICKETS AND
SENATORS WHO ARE COMING BACK
SUNDAY AT 4 NEED TO PLAN NOW.
BUT WE HAVE TALKS STARTING
WEDNESDAY, THURSDAY, TO SEE IF
THEY CAN COME UP WITH A DEAL.
JUDY, THERE'S NO KNOWN SOLUTION
RIGHT NOW.
IT'S POSSIBLE WE COULD SEE THE
PROVISIONS EXPIRE AT LEAST FOR A
SHORT TIME.
COMPLETELY UNKNOWN NOW.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL BE
WATCHING, LISA DESJARDINS.
THANK YOU.
>> YOU GOT IT.
>> Woodruff: THE PATRIOT ACT IS
THIS WEEK IN THE PRESIDENTIAL
RACE.
SO NO BETTER TIME FOR POLITICS
MONDAY.
JOINING ME OUR WEEKLY WRAP ARE
REGULAR GUESTS, AMY WALTER OF
THE "COOK POLITICAL REPORT," AND
TAMARA KEITH OF NPR.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH AND THANK
YOU FOR BEING HERE ON THIS
MEMORIAL DAY.
SO THE PATRIOT ACT, I'VE JUST
BEEN TALKING TO LISA ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED IN THE COMING, BUT IT'S
ALSO SOMETHING THE PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES HAVE TO DEAL WITH.
AMY, HOW MUCH ARE THEY TALKING
ABOUT THIS OR ARE THEY TALKING
ABOUT THIS OUT ON THE CAMPAIGN?
>> YEAH, THEY ARE TALKING ABOUT
IT IN RELATION TO ONE PERSON IN
PARTICULAR, THE PERSON THAT LISA
BROUGHT UP, RAND PAUL.
RAND PAUL IS ONAN ISLAND BY
HIMSELF NOW.
THE ONE PERSON SAYING WE NEED TO
GET RID OF THIS PROGRAM
ALTOGETHER.
HE IS A KNOWN LIBERTARIAN,
SOMEBODY WHO HAS BEEN TAKING
THIS CAUSE ON FOR A GOOD, LONG
TIME.
AND THE OTHER CANDIDATES ARE
TRYING TO SHOW SORT OF THEIR
HAWKISH MUSCLES OF ACCUSING HIM
OF BEING SOFT ON TERRORISM.
>> Woodruff: IS THAT WORKING,
TAMARA?
>> ONE THING THAT IS WORKING FOR
RAND PAUL IS THAT WHILE HE WAS
DOING HIS FILIBUSTER, WHILE HE
WAS DOING IN, HE'S FUNDRAISING.
HE'S OBVIOUSLY BEING
INTELLECTUALLY CONSISTENT HERE.
THIS IS AN ISSUE HE CARES ABOUT
AND HAS CARED ABOUT.
ALSO EXCELLENT FOR RAISING A
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE'S PROFILE
AND HE HAD YOUNG PEOPLE TAKING
SELFIES OF THEMSELVES, WATCHING
HIM ON TELEVISION, AND TWEETING
THAT OUT SAYING THEY STAND WITH
RAND.
HIS CAMPAIGN WAS SENDING AROUND
A PETITION TO GET PEOPLE TO SIGN
ON SAYING THEY SUPPORTED HIS
POSITION ON THIS SO HE'S
LEVERAGING IT.
>IT.
>> Woodruff: SO MOST OF THE
CANDIDATES THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
TO HAVE A POSITION ON THIS AT
THIS POINT?
>> THEY HAVE TO HAVE A POSITION.
THEY HAD TO VOTE ON IT.
WHAT YOU'RE SEEING IS, IT'S
INTERESTING, OF THE THREE TEA
PARTY CANDIDATES, THEY CAME IN
IN 2010, TED CRUZ, RAND PAUL.
RAND PAUL IS OFF BY HIS OWN.
TED CRUZ WANTS TO REFORM BUT NOT
GET RID OF THE PROGRAM
ALTOGETHER.
MARCO RUBIO THE MOST MUSCULAR
SAYING NOT ONLY KEEP IT GOING
BUT EVEN STRONGER.
CHRIS CHRISTIE AND JEB BUSH ALSO
HAVE BEEN TALKING ABOUT HAVING A
VERY STRONG SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM,
HOW IMPORTANT IT IS FOR TRIM.
IF YOU'RE -- HOW IMPORTANT IT IS
FOR TERRORISM.
IF YOU'RE CHRIS CHRISTIE,
GOVERNOR OF A STATE IMPACT BID
9/11, IT GIVES YOU AN
OPPORTUNITY TO TALK ABOUT HOW
THE GOVERNOR HAD TO DEAL WITH
TERRORISM AND SECURITY ISSUES.
>> Woodruff: THE OTHER THING,
THE LEAD STORY, TALKING ABOUT
I.S.I.S. AND THE CRITICISM FROM
THE DEFENSE SECRETARY AND A
LITTLE BIT OF WHAT SOUNDS LIKE
REPAIR WORK DONE BY THE
VICE PRESIDENT DOES POINT TO THE
DIFFICULTIES THE ADMINISTRATION
IS HAVING NOW WITH DEALING WITH
THE ISLAMIC STATE.
THE CANDIDATES ARE NOW TALKING
ABOUT THIS.
HOW MUCH -- WE'RE CLEAR THAT --
WE KNOW WHERE RAND PAUL IS ON
ALL THIS.
HE'S THE LEAST EXCITED ABOUT
HAVING AMERICAN TROOPS ON THE
GROUND.
BUT THERE'S AN ARRAY OF OPINIONS
AMONG THESE REPUBLICANS.
>> INCLUDING PEOPLE LIKE LINDSEY
HILSUM, WHO ARE BEING VERY
SPECIFIC SAYING WE SHOULD SEND
10,000 GROUND TROOPS OVER RIGHT
NOW.
THEN THERE ARE OTHER PEOPLE JUST
TAKING THE SAFE POSITION WHICH
IS JUST CRITICIZE THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION.
THAT IS THE SAFEST THING A
REPUBLICAN CANDIDATE CAN DO,
CRITICIZE THE PRESIDENT BUT
DON'T GET PARTICULARLY SPECIFIC
ABOUT WHAT YOU WOULD DO
DIFFERENTLY.
THE REALITY IS THIS IS TOUGH.
THERE ISN'T A GOOD, RIGHT
ANSWER.
IF THERE WAS A GOOD, RIGHT
ANSWER, THE SENATE AND THE
CONGRESS WOULD HAVE ALREADY
PASSED AN AUTHORIZATION FOR THE
USE OF MILITARY FORCE.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT'S JUST
BEEN SITTING IN CONGRESS,
WAITING FOR ACTION BECAUSE,
WELL, NOBODY WANTS THEIR
FINGERPRINTS ON IT.
THIS IS TOUGH.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
I THINK IT WAS THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" THAT WROTE REPUBLICANS
ARE HAWKISH BUT HESITANT.
THAT'S A PERFECT WAY TO DESCRIBE
THIS.
THEY ALL WANT TO SHOW THEY'RE
STRONGER ON NATIONAL SECURITY
THAN BARACK OBAMA.
AT THE SAME TIME, THEY KNOW THAT
IF THEY GO TOO FAR AND GET OVER
THEIR SKIS ON THIS ISSUE, THEY
WILL TURN OFF SWING VOTERS IN A
GENERAL ELECTION.
YOU LOOK AT WHERE THE
REPUBLICANS ARE, SHOULD WE PUT
GROUND TROOPS ON TO FIGHT
I.S.I.S., *6 0% SAY YES.
ACROSS THE BOARD IS MORE EVENLY
DIVIDED.
>> Woodruff: MAKES ME CURIOUS
HOW MUCH THEY FEEL THEY NEED TO
HAVE A FLUSHED-OUT OPINION ON
THIS AT THIS POINT.
WE'LL TALK ABOUT THAT NEXT WEEK.
THERE ARE THREE MORE CANDIDATES
JUMPING INTO IS IT RACE THIS
WEEK.
YOU'VE GOT TWO REPUBLICANS,
TAMARA -- RICK SANTORUM AND
GEORGE PA TACKY, FOR THOSE WHO
MAY NOT REMEMBER, THE FORMER
GOVERNOR OF NEW YORK.
THEN SATURDAY THE FORMER
GOVERNOR OF MARYLAND RUNNING FOR
THE DEMOCRATIC NOMINATION.
LET'S TALK ABOUT EACH ONE OF
THEM.
RICK SANTORUM, HOW DOES HE FIT
INTO THE GROWING ROSTER OF
REPUBLICANS?
>> HE WAS THE RUNNER UP TO THE
RUNNER UPAST L TIME AROUND.
HE ACTUALLY WON IOWA.
HE HELD ON FOR A VERY LONG TIME,
GAVE MITT ROMNEY A LOT OF
HEADACHES.
HE WAS SORT OF THE SOCIALLY
CONSERVATIVE CRUSADER.
THIS TIME AROUND, HE'S STILL
OBVIOUSLY VERY MUCH SOCIALLY
CONSERVATIVE BUT ALSO DOING THIS
MAN OF THE PEOPLE THING.
HE'S VERY CONCERNED.
HE FEELS LIKE REPUBLICANS NEED
TO HAVE A STRONG MESSAGE ON THE
WORKING CLASS AND MIDDLE CLASS
AND HELPING PEOPLE OUT.
SO THAT IS HIS NEW LANE.
HE'S GOT A LOT OF COMPETITION
THROUGH THE PEOPLE WHO SUPPORTED
HIM LAST TIME AROUND.
>> Woodruff: WHAT WOULD YOU
ADD?
>> NO, I THINK THAT'S EXACTLY
RIGHT.
HE DOES INTRODUCE HIMSELF BY
SAYING -- YOU KNOW, A LOT OF
TIMES REPUBLICANS NOMINATED THE
PERSON WHO CAME IN SECOND.
SO LOOK AT
IN IOWA, THE PLACE WHERE HE
CARRIED THE CAUCUS, YOU HAVE THE
SENSE THAT HE'S LIKE THE USED
CAR AND NEW CAR LOT.
EVERYBODY'S LOOKING AND SAYING
WE LIKED IT BUT WE HAVE ALL
THESE OTHER CHOICES NOW.
PUTS HIM IN AN AWKWARD POSITION.
>> Woodruff: JUST ONE MORE
MOMENT.
I WANT TO TGE TO GEORGE PATAKI
AND GOVERNOR O'MALLEY.
>> GEORGE PATAKI WAS THE
GOVERNOR OF A BIG STATE IN
NEW YORK.
BEAT MARIO CUOMO, ONE OF THE BIG
UPSETS IN 1994.
SO HE HAD REAL CREDENTIALS.
AND I DON'T KNOW, MAYBE YOU DO,
WHAT HIS MESSAGE IS BEYOND THE
FACT HE WAS A BIG STATE
GOVERNOR.
>> YES.
>> Woodruff: ALL RIGHT, WE'LL
LEAVE IT THERE, MARTIN O'MALLEY,
FORMER GOVERNOR OF MARYLAND,
TAMARA?
>> YES, FORMER GOVERNOR OF
MARYLAND.
HE WILL BE ANNOUNCING IN
BALTIMORE, WHERE HE ALSO WAS
MAYOR.
ONE OF THE CHALLENGES ARE THE
RIOTS THAT BROKE OUT IN
BALTIMORE AND SOME SAY HIS
POLICING STRATEGIES WHEN HE WAS
MAYOR LED TO SOME OF THE
DEEP-SEATED CONFLICT.
>>THIS IS AN UNANSWERED
QUESTION FOR MARTIN O'MALLEY.
HOW AGGRESSIVE WILL HE BE
AGAINST HILLARY CLINTON?
WILL HE BE OUT THERE GOING FULL
FORCE AT HER OR IS HE GOING TO
LAY BACK A LITTLE BIT?
HILLARY CLINTON SHOULD WANT AND
NEEDS TO HAVE A SPARRING
PARTNER.
SHE SHOULD NOT WANT TO GO INTO A
GENERAL ELECTION WITHOUT ANY
WARMUP AT ALL.
SHE HAS A LOT OF QUESTIONS TO
ANSWER.
REPUBLICANS WANT TO ASK HER A
LOT OF THOSE QUESTIONS.
IF THEY DON'T GET A CHANCE,
MARTIN O'MALLEY WILL.
>> Woodruff: SHE WELCOMES THE
QUESTION.
>> I'M SURE SHE DOES.
>> Woodruff: AMY WALTER,
TAMARA KEITH, POLITICS MONDAY.
THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: TONIGHT WE BEGIN A
SERIES OF REPORTS FROM PAKISTAN,
A NATION THAT'S BEEN GRIPPED FOR
YEARS BY POLITICAL INSTABILITY,
SECTARIAN VIOLENCE, NATURAL
DISASTERS, AND POVERTY.
THE COUNTRY IS ALSO HOME TO ONE
OF THE WORLD'S LARGEST
POPULATIONS OF YOUNG PEOPLE.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FRED DE
SAME LAZARO RECENTY MET WITH
SOME INNOVATORS IN THE CAPITAL
KARACHI WHO ARE HOPING THAT
GENERATION WILL FUEL PAKISTAN'S
RISE TO BECOMING A HIGH-TECH
POWERHOUSE.
THE STORY IS PART OF OUR "AGENTS
FOR CHANGE" SERIES.
>> Reporter: IT'S ONE OF ASIA'S
FASTEST GROWING TECH START-UP
COMPANIES.
THIS TEAM OF WEBSITE DEVELOPERS
IS ON A PROJECT FOR COCA COLA.
>> Reporter: UMAIR AZIZ, THE
FOUNDER, CAN NAME-DROP OTHER
BLUE CHIP AMERICAN CLIENTS.
>> SEARS, AMAZON, MICROSOFT.
>> Reporter: ONE SECRET TO HIS
SUCCESS; ACTUALLY ITS PRETTY
MUCH A SECRET, PERIOD, IS WHERE
THIS COMPANY, CALLED CREATIVE
CHAOS, IS LOCATED... KARACHI.
THE TEEMING AND INDEED CHAOTIC
COMMERCIAL CAPITAL OF PAKISTAN.
A COUNTRY BESET BY TERRORIST
VIOLENCE AND POLITICAL
INSTABILITY, A CITY THAT RANKS
AS ONE OF THE WORLD' MOST
VIOLENT.
>> WE DON'T WANT TO BE OUT OF
THE RACE BY ADVERTISING THAT
WE'RE BASED IN PAKISTAN.
THERE'S A VERY NEGATIVE STIGMA
ATTACHED TO THE COUNTRY,
Reporter: PROSPECTIVE CUSTOMERS
FIRST SEE ON CREATIVE CHAOS'
WEBSITE, COMPLETE WITH AN
AMERICAN 1-800 NUMBER.
THEY SOON LEARN THAT, ASIDE FROM
A SMALL OFFICE IN SAN FRANCISCO,
THE WORKERS ARE ALL IN PAKISTAN.
ONCE HIRED, AZIZ SAYS HIS
COMPANY HAS NEVER BEEN REMOVED
FROM A JOB.
>> PEOPLE IN THE U.S. REALLY
DON'T KNOW THAT THERE'S A WORLD
OUTSIDE OF TALIBAN, AND THERE'S
A WORLD OUTSIDE OF, YOU KNOW,
EVERYTHING THAT THEY HEAR ON CNN
AND BBC ALL THE TIME.
>> Reporter: IT'S IN THAT WORLD
THAT AZIZ CARVED OUT A
PROFITABLE NICHE.
BACK IN 2000, HE WAS FRESH OUT
OF COLLEGE IN OHIO AND WORKING
FOR A BOSTON TECH FIRM WHEN HE
DECIDED TO RETURN TO HIS NATIVE
KARACHI.
>> I KNEW THERE WERE HUNDREDS
AND THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE LIKE ME
WHO COULD JOIN, YOU KNOW, MY
ORGANIZATION.
IT WAS A RISK, BUT I WAS BETTING
ON THE TALENT.
>> Reporter: HIS IS ONE OF A
HANDFUL OF THRIVING PAKISTANI
START UPS-DESIGNING WEBSITES,
DATABASES AND APPLICATIONS FOR
GLOBAL CLIENTS.
THE TECH SECTOR IS SEEING A
HEALTHY 35% ANNUAL GROWTH AND
AZIZ EXPECTS HIS FIRM TO GROW
FIVE FOLD BY 2020.
IN RAW NUMBERS, THOUGH, THAT
TALENT POOL COULD BE A LOT
LARGER, SAYS JEHAN ARA, HERSELF
A TECH ENTREPRENEUR
>> THE COUNTRY IS ABOUT 200
MILLION PEOPLE, AND 70% OF THEM
BELOW THE AGE OF 30.
SO IT'S A VERY YOUNG POPULATION.
THE POTENTIAL IS AMAZING.
HOW TO CHANNEL THAT POTENTIAL IS
SOMETHING THAT WE ARE ALL SORT
OF THINKING ABOUT.
>> Reporter: ARA IS LEADING AN
EFFORT TO SCOUT THAT TALENT-
TRYING TO CREATE WHAT THE
TECHNOLOGY BUSINESS CALLS AN
ECOSYSTEM TO FOSTER CREATIVITY
AND NEW BUSINESS.
>> TH IS ISTHE NEST, A SO-CALLED
INCUBATOR.
HERE, 13 TEAMS OF TECHIES,
CHOSEN FROM MORE THAN A HUNDRED
APPLICANTS ARE WORKING ON WHAT A
PANEL OF JUDGES DECIDED WERE THE
MOST PROMISING BUSINESS IDEAS.
>> WE ARE LOOKING FOR YOUNG
PEOPLE WHO'VE DEVELOPED A
MINIMUM VIABLE PRODUCT
THEMSELVES, WHILE AT HOME, OR AT
UNIVERSITY.
WE KNOW THAT THEY ARE COMMITTED
TO DOING THIS.
AND THEN ONCE THEY GET HERE,
THEN WE CAN HELP THEM FURTHER.
>> Reporter: FOR PAKISTAN, THIS
IS A RA WORREK ENVIRONMENT AND
NOT JUST BECAUSE IT'S OFFERED
FOR FREE TO THESE WOULD-BE TECH
TITANS.
THEY HAVE RELIABLE POWER,
BROADBAND AND HARDWARE MANY
COULD NOT AFFORD ON THEIR OWN,
PLUS A CONNECTION TO GLOBAL
RESOURCES FROM DONORS TO THE
FACILITY, INCLUDING GOOGLE AND
SAMSUNG.
THEY PRACTICE THEIR PITCHES IN
SPEED DATING-TYPE SESSIONS, THE
CLASSIC SILICON VALLEY APPROACH
TO LURE INVESTORS.
AND THEY SUBJECT EACH OTHER TO
SOMETIMES WITHERING CRITIQUES
THIS ARGUMENT WAS ABOUT THE
WEBSITE OF A START UP BY 23-
YEAR-OLD SHOAIB AND A PARTNER.
IT'S A KIND OF LOCAL ANGIE'S
LIST THAT PROVIDES CERTIFIED
WORKERS VETTED NOT JUST BY
COMPETENCE BUT, CRITICAL IN THIS
CRIME-RIDDEN CITY-BACKGROUND
CHECK.
>> IT'S JUST SO CLUTTERED.
>> Report: WEer ASKED RUMAISA
MUGHAL TO EXPLAIN HER
RESERVATIONS ABOUT THE SITE IN
ENGLISH.
>> WHAT WOULD YOU LIKE TO SEE,
IN IT SPECIFICALLY?
LESS CLUTTER AND, AS WE TALKED
ABOUT, THEIR BRAND PERSONALITY.
IT'S VERY HARD FOR ME TO SEE
WHAT KIND OF CONCEIVE WHAT KIND
OF WHAT THE BRAND STANDS FOR: IS
IT CASUAL, IS IT CORPORATE?
CAN I TRUST THEM CAN I NOT?
IF THEIR WEBSITE IS SO MESSED
THEIR ORGANIZATION IS ALSO
MESSED UP, RIGHT?
>> I THINK SHE IS RIGHT IN MANY
WAYS BUT I WOULD DISAGREE WITH
DUE RESPECT ON MANY POINTS.
>> Reporter: MUGHAL'S OWN START
UP IS IN THE DESIGN BUSINESS,
CALLED ARTBOARD.
HER PRESENCE IN THIS MIX ALSO IS
SIGNIFICANT.
>> I.T. AND THE N ECOEWNOMY ARE
CERTAINLY OPENING DOORS FOR
WOMEN.
THE PROGRESS SADLY IS SLOW, BUT
DEFINITELY MORE WOMEN ARE COMING
IN THIS FIELD.
>> Reporter: WHILE THE NEST HAS
ATTRACTED SOME INVESTMENT FROM
ABROAD, ARA SAYS PAKISTAN'S OWN
BUSINESS COMMUNITY HAS BEEN
SLOWER TO PROVIDE THE VENTURE
CAPITAL THAT'S FUELED SO MUCH OF
INFORMATION TECH BUSINESS
GLOBALLY.
>> IT'S ONLY WHEN THE LOCAL
INVESTORS GET REALLY INTERESTED
THAT THE INDUSTRY IS GOING TO
TAKE OFF, THE START-UP INDUSTRY
IS GOING TO TAKE OFF.
>> Reporter: ONE BIG WORRY IS
PAKISTAN'S PRECARIOUS SECURITY
SITUATION, WHICH SHE FEARS COULD
DRIVE MANY ENTREPRENEURS TO TAKE
OFF-FOR JOBS OVERSEAS.
IN FACT, WE'D INTERVIEWED SABEEN
MAHMUD FOR THIS STORY.
SHE WAS SOCIAL ACTIVIST AND ONE
TIME TECH ENTREPRENUR, WHO RAN A
PERFORMANCE SPACE FOR THE ARTS
AND SOMETIMES CONTROVERSIAL
POLITICAL DEBATES.
DAYS LATER, SHE WAS ASSASINATED,
BY GUNMEN WHO HAVE YET TO BE
IDENTIFIED.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR IN KARACHI
PAKISTAN, THIS IS FRED DE SAM
LAZARO.
>> Woodruff: YOU CAN SEE FRED'S
NEXT STORY FROM PAKISTAN LATER
THIS WEEK.
FRED'S REPORTING IS A
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE UNDER-TOLD
STORIES PROJECT AT SAINT MARY'S
UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA.
>> WoodrufOWEMORIAL DAY WITH THE
DIFFERENT LOOKS AT THE RECENT
WARS THAT HAVE SHAPED OUR NATION
IN THIS THIS CENTURY.
THEY'VE TAKEN THE LIVES OF MORE
THAN 6,800 AMERICANS.
WE'LL LOOK AT THE TOLL THAT'S
HAD ON THE LOVED ONES AT HOME.
AND ONE MAN'S MISSION TO
MEMORIZE THE NAMES OF THE DEAD.
BUT FIRST, WE FOCUS ON
AFGHANISTAN, THE LONGEST
MILITARY CONFLICT IN U.S.
HISTORY.
HERE'S WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> THANKS, JUDY.
AMERICAN FORCES HAVE BEEN IN
AFGHANISTAN FOR 14 YEARS, NOW,
AND WITH THE TALIBAN STARTING
SPRING OFFENSIVE, THE U.S.
FORCES WILL AGAIN BE UNDER FIRE
TO.
BETTER UNDERSTAND THE LARGER
CONTEXT OF OUR INVOLVEMENT IN
AFGHANISTAN WE TURN TO CHARLES
STINNETT WHO REPORTED FOR THE
"BOSTON GLOBE," AS CO-FOUNDER OF
THE INTERNATIONAL REPORTING SITE
GLOBAL POST, FOR THE PBS
"NewsHour" AND THE GROUND TRUTH
PROJECT, A JOURNALISM NONPROFIT
TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION OF
INTERNATIONAL REPORTERS.
GROUND TRUTH JUST PUBLISHED
FOREVERSTAN, AFGHANISTAN ON THE
ROAD TO ENDING AMERICA'S LONGEST
WAR.
HERE'S A CLIP.
>> THE RING ROAD, 1300 MILES OF
HIGHWAY THAT CIRCLES
AFGHANISTAN.
THIS ROAD WAS BUILT BY
INTERNATIONAL DONORS INCLUDING
THE U.S. AND THE WORLD BANK WITH
A PRAYING OF MORE THAN
$3 BILLION.
IT'S ALSO CARRIED A HIGHER COST.
SINCE THE U.S.-LED INVASION IN
2001, HUNDREDS OF SOLDIERS AND
CIVILIANS WERE KILLED ALONG THIS
HIGHWAY, THE TARGETS OF ROADSIDE
BOMBS AND AMBUSHES BY THE
TALIBAN.
THE RING ROAD PROVIDES A
METAPHOR FOR THE U.S. PRESENCE
HERE, AN EFFORT TO LINK THE
MAJOR CITIES IN THE COUNTRY
BADLY FRACTURED ALONG ETHNIC
LINES AND THROUGH DECADES OF
BRUTALITY.
OUR JOURNEY ALONG THE RING ROAD
STARTS IN THE NORTHERN CITY OF
MUJAR SHARIF.
THE RING ROAD CIRCLES AND COMES
TO THE TOWN.
THIS IS WHERE ONE OF THE BIGGEST
BATTLES HAPPENED IN THE
IMMEDIATE DAYS AFTER
SEPTEMBER 11, 2001, AND THIS IS
WHERE AMERICA SUFFERED ITS FIRST
CASUALTY IN WHAT WOULD BECOME
AMERICA'S LONGEST WAR.
THE LONGEST ROAD, WE LOOKED AT A
GIRLS SCHOOL AND HOW THE RETURN
OF THE TALIBAN THREATENED
ADVANCES IN EDUCATION.
WE LOOKED AT MILLENNIALS, THE
YOUNG PEOPLE BORN AFTER 1980,
THE YEAR THE SOVIET INVASION GOT
UNDERWAY, A GENERATION THAT'S
KNOWN ONLY WAR BUT ALSO THE BEST
EDUCATED GENERATION IN AFGHAN
HISTORY.
AND WE LOOKED AT THE MILITARY
HANDOVER, HOW THE U.S. IS
HANDING THE WAR OFF TO AFGHAN
TROOPS AND WHAT THAT MEANS FOR
THE FUTURE OF AFGHANISTAN.
FOR THOSE FIGHTING IN THIS WAR
AND THOSE TRYING TO LIVE THROUGH
IT, IT SEEMS TO GO ON FOREVER.
>> WELCOME BACK TO THE
"NewsHour".
THE POWER STORIES YOU TELL ABOUT
THE GIRLS SCHOOL, THE YOUNG
MILLENNIALS IN AFGHANISTAN AND
THE AFGHAN FORCES, HELP ME
UNDERSTAND WHY DID YOU PICK
THOSE THREE STORIES?
>> WE WANTED TO GO RIGHT INTO
THE FUTURE OF AFGHANISTAN.
THIS HAS BECOME AMERICA'S
LONGEST WAR AND FEELS LIKE WE
HAVE BEEN THERE FOREVER.
BUT WE WANTED TO LOOK AT WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN IT ENDS, WHAT
HAPPENS AFTER ALL THESE YEARS OF
FIGHTING, WHAT IS THERE.
SO WE THOUGHT, BEGINNING WITH
THE GIRLS SCHOOL IS VERY
IMPORTANT BECAUSE THAT IS ONE OF
THE GREAT ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE
U.S. PRESENCE IN AFGHANISTAN,
ONE FIERCELY DEFENDED BY MOST OF
THE AFGHAN PEOPLE WHO WANT TO
SEE THE SCHOOLS STAY LONG AFTER
THE U.S. FORCES PULL OUT.
WE ALSO WANTED TO, OF COURSE,
LOOK AT THE HANDOVER BECAUSE
THAT IS SUCH AN EXTRAORDINARY
MOMENT ABOUT THE FATE OF THIS
COUNTRY, HOW WILL THE NEW AFGHAN
ARMY AND THE NEW AFGHAN NATIONAL
POLICE TAKE OVER IN THE FUTURE?
SO OUR PHOTOGRAPHER HAS DONE
YEARS OF DOCUMENTING THAT AND I
THINK IT REALLY COMES THROUGH
JUST HOW PERILOUS A MOMENT IT
IS.
RIGHT NOW IT'S THIS HANDOVER,
HOPEFULLY WILL TAKE PLACE NEXT
YEAR, 2016.
OF COURSE, WE WANTED TO LOOKT A
MILLENNIALS BECAUSE THAT IS THE
GENETIONRA THAT IS THE FUTURE OF
AFGHANISTAN, SO WE REALLY WANTED
TO KEY IN ON NOT JUST GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS BUT ALSO ARTISTS AND
SCHOOL TEACHERS AND PEOPLE WHO
ARE EVEN CONSTRUCTION WORKERS,
PEOPLE WHO DO ALL WALKS OF LIFE
IN AFGHANISTAN, WHAT WHAT DOES
THEIR FUTURE LOOK LIKE?
>> SPEAKING OF THAT FUTURE, THE
FOUNDER OF THE GIRLS SCHOOL YOU
FEATURE, SHE SAID AT ONE POINT
IN THE FILM -- THIS IS A WOMAN
WHO POWERFULLY BELIEVES IN THE
IMPORTANCE OF EDUCATION FOR
AFGHAN GIRLS -- SHE SAILS SHE
THINKS THE U.S. WILL NEVER LEAVE
OR AT LEAST NOT FOR A LONG TIME.
IS SHE RIGHT?
>> I THINK SHE IS RIGHT.
WE'VE SEEN REASON FOR HER TO
FEEL THAT WAY.
CERTAINLY, THE WASHINGTON
MENTION HAS BEEN THAT THIS
PULLOUT WILL HAPPEN ANY DAY NOW
AND WE'VE HEARD THIS FOR YEARS.
LITERALLY, IT'S BEEN POSTPONED
TIME AND TIME AGAIN, SO I THINK
WE CAN UNDERSTAND WHERE SHE'S
COMING FROM IN THAT SENTIMENT.
I THINK IT'S ALSO AN EXPRESSION
OF A YEARNING THAT THE U.S.
WON'T LEAVE.
GETTING TO KNOW HER FOR YEARS,
YOU HEAR THE UNITED STATES
FORCES ARE NEEDED TO PROTECT THE
SCHOOLS BECAUSE THERE IS A GREAT
FEAR THE TALIBAN WILL RETURN.
>> OVER OBVIOUSLY SPENT A GREAT
DEAL TIME OF TIME AND UPONY TO
TRAIN AFGHAN FORCES TO TAKEN
OVER WHEN WE LEAVE.
WE'VE SEEN A LOT OF EXAMPLES OF
IRAQI FORCES WHOM WE'VE SPENT
MONEY AND TRAINING ON TO GET
THEM UP TO SPEED AND THAT HASN'T
WORKED OUT WELL.
WHAT IS YOUR SENSE OF HOW WELL
THE AFGHAN FORCES CAN DO IF WE
LEAVE?
>> THEY'RE WORRISOME.
THE AFGHAN NATIONAL ARMY AND THE
ASSESSMENT OF THE REPORTERS ON
THE GROUND WILL BE THEY'RE VERY
ILL PREPARED.
I THINK THAT'S BORNE OUT EVERY
DAY.
IT'S NOT FOR LACK OF TRYING AND
CERTAINLY NOT FOR LACK OF
SPENDING MONEY.
MANY WOULD ARGUE THERE'S BEEN
PROFITED WASTE OF MONEY PUT
TOWARD TRAINING THE FORCES,
GIVEN WHERE THEY ARE.
THAT SAID, I THINK THERE IS
IMPROVEMENT BUT YOU COME AWAY
FROM THAT EXPERIENCE.
BEN BRODY, OUR PHOTOGRAPHER,
SPENDING YEARS WITH THESE FORCES
WONDERING ARE THEY READY, AND
THE SENSE IS A THEY'RE NOT.
I THINK THAT'S A FAIR ASSESSMENT
FROM THE GROUND AS A REPORTER.
I ALSO THINK THERE'S A NEED FOR
THE AFGHAN NATIONAL POLICE TO
REALLY STEP IT UP.
CORRUPTION IS A BIG ISSUE, AND
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO JUST BE
SURE WE STAY ON THESE TROOPS TO
MAKE SURE THEY'RE ABLE TO TAKE
OVER PAUSE NAY ARE THE FUTURE OF
AFGHANISTAN.
>> AFTER YOUR REPORTING AND ALL
YOUR COLLEAGUES HAVE DONE,
WHAT'S YOUR SENSE OF THE FUTURE?
IF YOU THINK AFGHANISTAN IS ON
THE RIGHT PATH?
>> THAT'S A HARD QUESTION.
I THINK THAT QUESTION DEPENDS ON
WHERE YOU ARE IN AFGHANISTAN.
THE RING ROAD WE FOCUSED ON IN
THE NORTH.
IN EVERY CORNER OF THAT RING
ROAD, I WOULD SAY TO YOU THERE'S
A DIFFERENT STORY.
YOU KNOW, KABUL, RECENTLY, THE
SECURITY SITUATION IS
DISINTEGRATING.
KANDAHAR, ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE.
HARAT, RELATIVELY SAFE.
MAZAR SHARIF, THEY'RE STEPPING
UP ATTACKS, THE ATTACK ON THE
COURTHOUSE THERE.
COMING BACK TO THE NORTHERN
CORNER OF AFGHANISTAN, I WAS
AMAZED AT THE PROGRESS -- NEW
AIRPORT, SMOOTHLY-PAVED ROADS
AND A LOT OF PROGRESS IN TRADE.
SO IT IS DEFINITELY A MIXED
SENSE OF WHAT THE FUTURE HOLDS.
I THINK THERE'S SOME ROOM FOR
HOPE.
>> CHARLIE SENNOTT, THE GROUND
TRUTH PROJECT.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: NOW WE TURN OUR
FOCUS CLOSER TO HOME.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE MORE THAN
TWO MILLION MEN AND WOMEN SERVE
IN THE COUNTRY'S ALL-VOLUNTEER
MILITARY FORCE, A NEW
DOCUMENTARY, "THE HOMEFRONT,"
FOCUSES ON THE ADDITIONAL THREE
MILLLION HUSBANDS, WIVES, SONS
AND DAUGHTERS WHO REMAIN BEHIND.
THEY CARRY ON THEIR LIVES WHILE
A LOVED ONE IS OVERSEAS FOR
MONTHS, EVEN MORE THAN A YEAR,
AND SOMETIMES ON MULTIPLE
DEPLOYMENTS.
THIS IS PART OF PBS'S MILITARY
VOICES INITIATIVE.
>> I'M A SPECIALIST, I'M IN THE
ARMY RESERVE.
I JOINED HOPING THAT I COULD GET
A DEPLOYMENT AS QUICK AS I COULD
BECAUSE I WANT TO DO THINGS FOR
MY COUNTRY.
THE ONLY THING I HAVE TROUBLE
WITH IS LEAVING MY FAMILY.
MY MOM, I KNOW SHE'S NOT GOING
TO WANT TO SEE ME GO.
AND MY DAD, HE'S GOING TO HAVE A
REALLY HARD TIME WITH IT, TOO.
BUT THEY'RE ALL PROUD OF ME.
THAT'S ALL THAT MATTERS.
BYE.
>> BYE.
THESE WARS ARE VERY DIFFERENT
THAN THE ONES WE'VE FOUGHT IN
THE PAST.
WHEN WE FIRST STARTED, WE HAD
NOT DEPLOYED FOR AN EXTENDED
PERIOD OF TIME.
THEN THE LENGTH OF DEPLOYMENT IS
12 MONTHS AND, IN SOME CASES,
15-MONTH DEPLOYMENTS.
THEN GOING BACK FOR SECOND, THE
THIRD AND THE FOURTH TIME, THE
IMPACT IT HAS ON OUR FAMILIES
WAS SIGNIFICANT.
>> IT'S DEFINITELY TRUE IF THE
WHOLE FAMILY SERVES.
YOU'RE ASKING KIDS TO MOVE
FREQUENTLY.
YOU'RE ASKING KIDS AND SPOUSES
TO BE WITHOUT THE OTHER SPOUSE
FOR LONG PERIODS OF TIME.
THE DEPLOYMENTS HAVE BEEN TOUGH
ON FAMILIES.
>> THIS IS THE FIRST GENERATION
OF MILITARY KIDS THAT HAVE GROWN
UP EXPERIENCING MOM AND DAD
BEING GONE FOR MULTIPLE
DEPLOYMENTS AND WE'RE WORKING
HARD TO UNDERSTAND WHAT THE
IMPLICATIONS OF THIS LIFESTYLE
IS FOR CHILDREN.
WE'RE NOT LIKELY TO REALLY FULLY
UNDERSTAND UNTIL LATER.
>> WE ARE ENGAGED IN THE LONGEST
COMBAT OPERATIONS IN OUR
COUNTRY.
IT IS BEING DONE FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN OUR HISTORY, WE'RE AN
ALL-VOLUNTEER PROFESSIONAL
MILITARY FORCE.
THAT TAKES A GREAT TOLL ON OUR
FAMILIES.
IT'S BEEN A STRUGGLE.
>> EVERY DAY YOU WAKE UP, YOU
KNOW THE PERSON YOU LOVE IS IN
HARM'S WAY, AND THERE'S A LOT OF
PRAYING GOING ON.
>> WHEN I TRAVEL AROUND TO VISIT
TROOPS, I WILL OFTEN ASK THEM,
HOW MANY ARE OON YOUR FIRST
DEPLOYMENT?
YOUR SECOND, THIRD, FOURTH,
FIFTH?
I'LL GENERALLY GET UP TO SIX,
SEVEN, SOMETIMES EIGHT, AND I
THINK SOME YOUNG MEN AND WOMEN
ACTUALLY HAVE TO DECIDE FOR
THEMSELVES.
WHICH ONE IS THE REAL WORLD?
IS IT THE WORLD THAT THEY
EXPERIENCE WITH THEIR BATTLE
BUDDIES AND WING MEN AND SWING
BUDDIES IN COMBAT OR IS IT THE
WORLD AT HOME?OODRUFF WAS SEVERY
WOUNDED IN 2006 WHILE COVERING
THE WAR IN IRAQ.
HE SUFFERED TRAUMATIC BRAIN
INJURIES AND SPENT 36 DAYS IN A
MEDICALLY INDUCED COMA.
HE SINCE RAISED MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS TO HELP WOUNDED
GENERATES THROUGH THE BOB
WOODRUFF FOUNDATION.
HE'S THE TOAST OF "THE
HOMEFRONT" AIRING LATER ON PBS
LATE THERE ARE EVENING AND JOINS
ME NOW.
WHEN YOU STARTED WORKING WITH
THIS DOCUMENTARY, YOU HAVE BEEN
COVERING THE STORY FOR A WHILE.
WHAT STRUCK ME FROM THE CLIP IS
THE WHOLE FAMILY SERVES.
THAT'S AN INTERESTING IDEA IN
THESE WARS COMPARATIVELY.
>> THE HARD THING TO GET INSIDE
THE PENTAGON IS TO GET THE
FAMILIES TO TALK TO THE FORCES.
THAT WAS A BIG ACCOMPLISHMENT.
THE OTHER THING CLOSE TO MY
HEART, THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN ON
THE SAND, WE GET ALL OF THE
ATTENTION AND THE CARE, BUT
THOSE WHO REALLY HAVE IN SOME
WAYS SUFFERED THE MOST OR HAVE
JUST LIVED MORE ARE THE
FAMILIES, AND THAT'S THE KIDS,
THE WIVES, THE HUSBANDS, THE
PARENTS, ALL OF THEM NEVER GET
MUCH INFORMATION OUT THERE ABOUT
WHAT THEIR LIVES ARE LIKE.
AND WE HAD THIS VERY
INTERESTING, UNIQUE WAY TO DO
IT.
>> Sreenivasan: SO YOU'VE
TALKED TO THE FAMILIES OF SO
MANY MEMBERS OF THE ARMED
SERVICES FOR SO LONG.
SHE SAID SOMETHING INTERESTING,
WHAT ARE THE LONG-TERM
CONSEQUENCE FORCE THE CHILDREN.
WHAT HAPPENS IF YOU LITERALLY
DON'T SEE YOUR MOM OR DAD FOR
SEVERAL MONTHS IN A TIME FOR
THOSE FORMATIVE YEARS.
>> ONE TO HAVE THE IMPORTANT
THINGS PEOPLE DON'T THINK ABOUT,
IN PREVIOUS WARS, LARGELY
THEY'RE SINGLE-DEPLOYMENT WARS.
WORLD WAR I AND VIETNAM, TO
LARGE DEGREE.
PEOPLE WOULD COME OUT AND EITHER
VOLUNTEER LIKE NOW OR DRAFTED
BEFORE, PROBABLY BEFORE THEY
ACTUALLY HAVE A FAMILY.
THE FAMILIES ARE FORMED LARGELY
WHEN THEY CAME BACK, ESPECIALLY
AFTER WORLD WAR II.
BUT IN THIS CASE, SOME GO BEFORE
THERE'S A KID OR THEY VOLUNTEER
AFTER THEY HAVE KIDS AND
FAMILIES AND GO BACK AND FORTH
AND BACK AND FORTH.
SOMETIMES THEY COME BACK, HAVE
ANOTHER KID, GO BACK AGAIN.
AND BECAUSE THE KIDS GET OLDER
AFTER 13 YEARS OF WAR, THESE
KIDS ARE NOW UNDERSTANDING THE
WORLD, YOU HAVE TO EXPLAIN WHY
DAD OR MOM'S GOING BACK AGAIN,
AND IT MAKES A MUCH VERY
DIFFERENT KIND OF WAR THAN IT
WAS BEFORE.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ACTUALLY
WAS THE THREAT OF WHAT HAPPENED
AFTER THEY COME BACK FOR GOOD,
WITH THE INCREASED CASES OF PTSD
AND SADLY THE NUMBER OF
SUICIDES.
BUT THERE ARE ALSO THE ECONOMIC
CONSEQUENCES OF THEM PICKING
THEIR LIVES BACK UP AND YOU
WOULD THINK THEY WOULD HAVE A
JOB, A LOT OF THEM ARE
UNEMPLOYED.
>> THEY DON'T JUST COME BACK
WITH WOUNDS OR PTSD BUT JUST
GENERALLY THE MILITARY LIFE.
IT'S ONE THING TO TAKE A YEAR
OFF TO SERVE AND YOUR COMPANY
SAY WELCOME BACK WHEN YOU COME
BACK.
BUT EVERY TIME THERE'S A RISK.
YOU'RE REALLY TALKING ABOUT
THOSE WHO ARE REALLY NOT FULLY
ACTIVE STILL.
FOR THEM, THEY HAVE TO CONVINCE
THEIR COMPANY THEY'RE REALLY
GOING TO STAY, BUT THEY'RE NOT
ALWAYS GOING TO STAY.
SO THE JOBS AND THE ECONOMIC
ISSUE IS VERY COMPLICATED FOR
THE MILITARY FAMILIES.
>> Sreenivasan: SINCE ALL THE
WORK YOU HAVE BEEN DOING WITH
DIFFERENT WOUNDED WARRIORS
CHARITIES AND THE MONEY YOU HAVE
BEEN RAISING, IS THERE A
CONSISTENT THEME THAT RESONATES
YEAR AFTER YEAR WHEN YOU HAVE
THE FOUNDATION EVENTS?
>> WELL, ONE IS DON'T FORGET.
THERE IS AN IN A STRANGE WAY THE
WARS ARE COMING TO AN END-ISH.
IT'S NOT THE SAME AS EIGHT YEARS
WHEN THEY WERE PEAKING OUT IN
TERMS OF VIOLENCE AND INJURIES.
BUT WE WANT PEOPLE TO KNOW THERE
ARE ISSUES THAT ARE STILL THERE.
AND SINCE OUR FOUNDATION DEALS
WITH THOSE THAT ARE LARGELY
BADLY WOUNDED, WE'RE TRYING TO
SEE WHAT'S NEEDED IN THE FUTURE.
IN THE BEGINNING WE'RE HELPING A
LOT OF PROGRAMS WITH THE I.C.U.
LEVELS, WHERE PEOPLE ARE STILL
INJURED IN THE HOSPITALS.
THEN WE MOVE ON TO WHERE THEY'RE
DEALING WITH THEM A LOT, AND
THEY'RE COMING BACK TO THEIR
COMMUNITY, WHERE THEY CAN
DISAPPEAR AND NOT BE IGNORED ALL
THE TIME.
NOW WE'RE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
THE LONG-TERM HELP FOR THEIR
RECOVERY, GETTING JOBS, GETTING
A GREAT FUNCTION, VETERANS
HELPING VETERANS.
A LOT MORE INTO I IT AND
LEGITIMATE PROGRAMS THAT EXIST
OUT THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: BOB WOODRUFF,
"THE HOMEFRONT."
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: NOW OUR FINAL STORY
ON THIS MEMORIAL DAY, A PERSONAL
TRIBUTE TO AMERICAN SOLDIERS WHO
HAVE DIED IN THE AFGHANISTAN
WAR.
IT COMES TO US FROM THE UNITED
SERVICES AUTOMOBILE ASSOCIATION
OR U.S.A.A., AN INSURANCE AND
FINANCIAL SERVICES COMPANY
SERVING THOSE THAT HAVE SERVED
IN THE MILITARY AND THEIR
FAMILIES.
THEY PRODUCED THIS LOOK AT NAVY
VETERAN RON WHITE, WHO'S TAKEN
THE EXTRAORDINARY STEP TO
MEMORIZE THE NAMES OF ALL THOSE
KILLED IN AFGHANISTAN, AND WILL
WRITE THEM ALL ON A WALL.
WHEN I RETURNED FROM
AFGHANISTAN, THIS WAS ONE OF MY
THOUGHTS, THE NERAGEL PUBLIC
HAVE NO IDEA OF THE SCOPE OF
SACRIFICE SO MANY FAMILIES AND
HEROS MADE.
IF I WAS A PAINTER, I WOULD HAVE
PAINTED A PORTRAIT.
IF I WAS A SINGER, I WOULD HAVE
WRITTEN A SONG.
IT ONLY MADE SENSE TO USE ANY
MEMORY.
I MEMORIZED EVERY ONE WHO DIED
IN AFGHANISTAN AND I MEMORIZED
THEM IN THE ORDER OF THEIR
DEATH.
2300-PLUS PEOPLE, RANK, FIRST
AND LAST NAME.
IT'S OVER 7,000 WORDS.
IT'S JUST MY WAY TO HONOR THEM,
TO SAY YOU'RE SIGNIFICANT, YOUR
LIFE IS IMPORTANTND A WE HONOR
AND WON'T FORGET YOU.
EVERY FEW HOURS SOMEBODY WILL
WALK BY THAT WALL AND REMIND ME
THIS IS NOT JUST 7,000 WORDS.
THIS IS THEIR SON OU OR DAUGHTE.
FEBRUARY 28th, 2013 WAS THE
FIRST TIME I HAD EVER DONE THIS.
I WAS WRITING O ON THE WALL ANDI
HEARD THE NAME AUSTIN STAGS.
I KEPT WRITING.
I HEARD SOMEONE SAY THE NAME
AGAIN.
I KEPT WRITING.
I TURNED AROUND AND SAID, MA'AM,
THAT'S A NAME ON MY WALL.
DO YOU KNOW AUSTIN STAGS?
>> SHE SAID, YES, MY GRANDSON, I
CAME TO WATCH YOU WRITE HIS
NAME.
I SAID IT WILL BE ABOUT FOUR
HOURS.
SHE SAID, I'LL WAIT.
WE GOT HER A CHAIR AND SHE MOVED
THE CHAIR DOWN BEHIND ME FOR
FOUR HOURS.
I GOT TO THREE MINUTES TO
WRITING HIS NAME AND I SAID I'M
SORRY I TOOK SO LONG.
SHE SAID, I'M GLAD YOU DID, IT
GAVE HIS MA'AM TIME TO GET HERE.
SO I WROTE HIS NAME WITH THE MOM
AND GRANDMOM SITTING BEHIND ME.
IT WAS VERY EMOTIONAL AND I GAVE
THEM A HUG.
THE MOTHER SAID THANKS FO FOR NT
LETTING PEOPLE FORGET ABOUT MY
SON.
I DO DO IT TO KEEP THEIR MEMORY
ALIVE.
THAT'S THE PRIMARY REASON, BUT I
AM A BETTER PERSON OF LEARNING
THE STORIES.
I'VE HEARD SO MANY DIFFERENT
STORIES.
I DON'T KNOW THEAME N
SPECIFICALLY.
I WAS SO DISTRACTED.
I SAID IS THIS THE WALL?
I SAID YES AND I POINTED HER TO
THE WALL.
SHE SAID, MY BROTHER WAS A BIG,
STRONG GUY.
MY BROTHER WAS A MEDIVAC AND
WHEN THEY WOULD GO OUT, HE WOULD
CARRY HIS BACKPACK AND MY
OPINION BROTHER'S BACKPACK
BECAUSE MY BROTHER WAS A LITTLE
GUY.
HE WOULD WALK IN FRONT OF MY
BROTHER.
BECAUSE HE DID THAT, MY BROTHER
IS ALIVE TODAY AND HE LOST HIS
LIFE.
I WAS SO CAUGHT UP IN THE ROLE I
DIDN'T REALLY FOCUS ON THE NAME.
SHE LEFT AND I THOUGHT ABOUT IT.
I THOUGHT, MAN, I WISH I KNEW
THAT GUY'S NAME!
THEN IT HIT ME LATER ON THAT
NIGHT, IT DOESN'T MATTER THAT IE
THAT'S THE STORY OF ALL OF THEM.
ALL OF THEM CARRY THE BACKPACKS,
ALL OF THEM WENT BEFORE US AND
L OALF THEM MADE THAT SACRIFICE
SO THAT WE CAN LIVE.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, TWO MORE STORIES THAT
PAY TRIBUTE TO THE SACRIFICES
MADE BY U.S. MILITARY MEN AND
WOMEN IN OUR NATION'S HISTORY.
THERE HAVE BEEN MORE THAN 1.1
MILLION AMERICANS HAVE DIED IN
ALL U.S. WARS GOING BACK TO THE
REVOLUTION AGAINST THE BRITISH.
OUR DATA TEAM TOTALED THE NUMBER
OF FALLEN FROM EACH OF THOSE
CONFLICTS.
AND SEE HOW "UNCLE SAM" INSPIRED
YOUNG MEN AND WOMEN TO DO THEIR
PART FOR THE WAR EFFORT.
WE HAVE A PHOTO GALLERY OF
VINTAGE U.S. PROPAGANDA POSTERS
FROM WORLD WAR ONE.
YOU CAN SEE BOTH OF THOSE
STORIES ON OUR HOME PAGE,
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR,
VIETNAM'S DEVELOPING
CONTEMPORARY ART MARKET.
HERE'S A PREVIEW:
>> IT WASN'T THAT THIS WASN'T A
SOPHISTICATED, ARTISTICS
CULTURE.
IT IS VERY SOPHISTICATED.
BUT FROM 1930 TO 1980, THEY'RE
DOCUMENTING ALL THESE WARS.
SO IT WAS AFTER THE WAR ENDED,
ALL OF A SUDDEN, THERE WERE NO
MORE WARS TO DOCUMENT AND THAT
WAS REALLY THE BEGINNING AND
WHEN THE FIRE REALLY STARTED,
THE ROAD TO CONTEMPORARY.
>> Woodruff: THAT STORY
TOMORROW NIGHT.
>> Woodruff: TUNE IN FOR THAT
STORY TOMORROW NIGHT.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF, WE'LL SEE YOU
ONLINE, AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW
EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.